The Tyranny of Software Patents and Ownership of Ideas

Software patents are terrible for innovation and the technology industry as a whole, because they allow companies to purchase ideas, something that is horribly anti-competitive. A patent on an idea is a legal technicality that gives the patent holder the legal authority to ensure other companies don't create or attempt to create the same idea. The owner of the idea (patent) can extort payment from a would-be competitor, lest the competitor risk costly legal action. [A new article in Forbes](http://www.forbes.com/sites/ciocentral/2013/01/17/are-patent-trolls-now-zeroed-in-on-start-ups/) details a recent rise in patent trolls targeting startups.

What this means is that big companies and/or patent trolls can tie up startups in court and bleed them dry with legal fees.

We should all take a step back and think about what this means -- companies can **own ideas.** We're not talking about ownership rights to a specific technology, product, piece of code, or any other *actual invention*. We're talking about *ideas*. Companies can carve out entire market segments without building anything at all. All they need do is claim ownership of an idea by filing a patent application.

So, if you believe that ideas are cheap, and that execution is what matters, this should be *extremely* offensive to you. Our patent system effectively rewards both non-executers and those first-to-market (or patent application) with ownership of ideas for doing nothing except filing some documents. You needn't have a product, just the idea. Come up with an idea, file some papers, and boom, you own it. That patent arms the owner with the right to sue the pants off anyone else who attempts to execute on that idea. In normal business, we might call that *competition*, but our patent system makes it a criminal act. It's a fabulously effective way to shield oneself from having to build a competitive product (or any product at all, for that matter).

And here's the worst part -- it's not *just* the bad apples that take part in this behavior -- it's everyone. This phenomenon is what political scientists might call an "arms race". People file patents because they assume their competitors will do the same, so patents are often filed as a protective measure, to shield potential liability from legal action.

This absurd behavior will continue unchecked until we make drastic changes to our patent system. We must change our patent laws to disallow the ownership of ideas in software. Ideas are simply not the same as inventions or designs. Treating them as such hampers innovation, raises costs and reduces choice for consumers, it measurably raises the cost of starting a business, and creates effective mini-monopolies and oligopolies in different market segments.

[Ideas are indeed precious](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GnGI76__sSA
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GnGI76__sSA), but they're meaningless without the ability to execute on them. Software patents that enable ownership of ideas immeasurably reduces the ability to execute from anyone but the patent owner, and we must change that.